Digital Electronics I
EG 2104 EX
Total :7 hours/week
Year :II Lecture :4 hours/week
Part :I Tutorial :hours/week
Practica :3 hours/week
Course description
:
This course deals on the basic concepts of digital electronics. It also imparts knowledge on number
systems, logic gates, various codes, parities, Boolean algebra, mux and demux, filp-flop, counters
and shift registers.
Course Objectives
:
After completing this course the students will be able to
1. Design methods for combinational logic circuit.
2. Verify truth tables of basic gates and universal gates.
3. Design concept of sequential logic circuits.
4. Design problem based /predefined logic based circuits.
Course Contents
:
Unit 1: Introduction 2 hrs
1.1 Define digital and analog signals and systems; differentiate between analog and
digital signals.
1.2 Need of digitization and applications of digital systems.
Unit 2: Number Systems 9 hrs
2.1 Decimal, binary, octal and hexadecimal number systems
2.2 Conversion of number from one number system to another including decimal points.
2.3 Binary addition, subtraction, multiplication and division, 1’s and 2’s complement
method of subtraction.
2.4 BCD code numbers and their limitations, addition of BCD coded numbers,
conversion of BCD to decimal and vice-versa.
2.5 Excess-3 code, gray code, binary to gray and gray to binary conversion.
2.6 Concept of parity, single and double parity, error detection and correction using
parity.
Unit 3: Logic Gates 4 hrs
3.1 Logic gates, positive and negative logic, pulse waveform, definition, symbols, truth
tables, operation of NOT, OR, AND, NAND, NOR, EX-OR and EX-NOR gates.
3.2 Realization of NAND and NOR as universal logic gates.
20
Unit 4: Logic Simplification 8 hrs
4.1. Rules and laws of Boolean algebra, logic expression, De Morgan’s theorems and
their proof.
4.2. Sum of products form (minterm), Product of sum form (maxterms), simplification of
Boolean expressions with the help of Rules and laws of Boolean algebra.
4.3. Karnaugh mapping techniques up to 4 variables and their applications for
simplification of Boolean expression.
Unit 5: Arithmetic Circuits 3 hrs
5.1. Half adder, full adder circuits and their operation.
5.2. Block diagram and operation of Parallel binary adder (2-bit and 4-bit).
Unit 6: Multiplexer/Demultiplexer 4 hrs
6.1. Basic functions, symbols and logic diagrams of 4-inputs and 8-inputs multiplexers.
6.2. Function/utility of 16 and 32 inputs multiplexers.
6.3. Realization of Boolean expression using multiplexer/demultiplexers.
Unit 7: Decoders, Display Devices and Associated Circuits 4 hrs
7.1. Basic Binary decoder, 4-line to 16-line decoder circuit.
7.2. BCD to decimal decoder, BCD to 7-segment decoder/driver, LED/LCD display.
Unit 8: Encoders and Comparators 4 hrs
8.1. Encoder, decimal to BCD encoder, decimal to BCD priority encoder, keyboard
encoder.
8.2. Magnitude comparators, symbols and logic diagrams of 2-bit and 4-bit comparators.
Unit 9: Latches and Flip-Flops 6 hrs
9.1. Latch, SR-latch, D-latch, Flip-flop, difference between latch and flip-flop.
9.2. S-R, D flip-flop their operation using waveform and truth tables, race around
condition.
9.3. JK flip-flop, master slave and their operation using waveform and truth tables.
9.4. T flip-flops.
Unit 10: Counters 8 hrs
10.1. Asynchronous counter, 4-bit Asynchronous counter, Asynchronous decade counter.
10.2. Synchronous counter, 4-bit synchronous binary counter, synchronous decade
counter.
10.3. Up/down Asynchronous counters, divide by N counter MOD-3, MOD-5, MOD-7,
MOD-12 counters.
10.4. Ring counter, cascaded counter, counter applications.
Unit 11: Shift Registers 8 hrs
11.1. Shift registers functions, serial-in-serial out, serial-in-parallel-out, parallel-in-serial-
out, parallel-in-parallel out.
11.2. Universal shift register, shift register counter and applications of shift registers.
21
Practical /Laboratory: 45 hrs
1. Study of logic breadboard with verification of truth table for AND, OR, NOT, NAND,
EX-OR, NOR gate.
2. Verification of NAND and NOR gate as universal gates.
3. Construction of half-adder and full adder circuits using EX-OR and NAND gate and
verification of their operation.
4. Verify the operation of
a) Multiplexer using an IC.
b) De-multiplexer using an IC.
5. Verify the operation of
a) BCD to decimal decoder using an IC.
b) BCD to 7 segment decoder using an IC.
6. Verify operation of SR, JK, D-flip-flop master slave JK filp-flop using IC.
7. Verify operation of SISO, PISO, SIPO, PIPO shift register (universal shift register).
8. Study of ring counter, Up/down counter.
9. Construct and verify the operation of an asynchronous binary decade counter using JK
flip-flop.
10. Verification of truth tables and study the operation of tristate buffer IC 74126 or similar
IC and construction of 4/8 bit bi-directional bus by using an IC.
11. Testing of digital ICs using IC tester.
References:
1. Digital Electronics and Applications by Malvino Leach, Tata McGral Hill, New Delhi
2. Digital Logic Designs by Morris Mano, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi
3. Digital Fundamentals by Thomas Floyds, Universal Book Stall
4. Digital Electronics by RP Jain, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi
5. Digital Electronics by KS Jamwal, Dhanpat Rai & Co., New Delhi
6. Digital Electronics by Rajiv Sapra, Ishan Publication, Ambala
7. Digital Electronics by BR Gupta, Dhanpat Rai & Co., New Delhi
8. Digital Systems: Principles and Applications by RJ Tocci, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi
9. Digital Electronics by Rajaraman V., Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi
